---
title: "Individual and collective representation: the organisational form of higher education lobbying in the European Union"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2022-paper-individual-collective
excerpt: 'This paper is about the number 1. The number 2 is left for future work.'
date: 2022-08-07
venue: 'European Journal of Higher Education'
slidesurl: 'https://academicpages.github.io/files/slides1.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://academicpages.github.io/files/paper1.pdf'
bibtexurl: 'https://academicpages.github.io/files/bibtex1.bib'
citation: 'Paulissen, T., Fraussen, B. & Van Hecke, S. (2022). &quot;Individual and collective representation: the organisational form of higher education lobbying in the European Union.&quot; <i>European Journal of Higher Education</i>. 14(1), 1-19.'
---
Recent scholarly work on higher education institutions (HEIs) within an EU context has focused on how universities and their core activities have been affected by EU education policy. The organisation of HEIs in order to shape European decision-making on higher education, mainly through their presence in Brussels, has received much less attention. This article therefore focuses on how HEIs organise their EU representation and explains their choice for a specific organisational form, distinguishing between individual (i.e. a Brussels office), collective (i.e. via an association) and mixed representation (the combination of both a Brussels office and membership of an association). After systematically mapping the organisational form of 250 HEIs, we apply a mixed methods design to test our hypotheses derived from previous research on interest representation and lobbying. Our findings illustrate that the distance from Brussels is a key factor in the decision to open a Brussels office or join an association, whereas financial resources appear imperative for combining both forms of representation. Furthermore, we identify additional underlying motives for choosing a particular mode of representation, in particular the importance of information exchange, visibility and networking.
